Last week we talked about this idea.
Loved people, loved people.
You see, if you know you've been deeply loved by God, then there's this natural or supernatural response that you can love other people.
But if you don't know that you've been deeply loved by God, you know what this feels like?
It feels like a book of rules.
Do more.
Do better.
You're not doing enough.
But I don't know if you know this or not, this is not a book of rules.
This is a love story.
A story of how God so loved the world that he gave is one and only son offering us forgiveness and redemption and healing and peace and so much more.
We have been so deeply loved by Jesus that, well, if we recognize it and met him, it's gonna flow out of us to other people.
And last weekend we talked about the identities that all of us had before he met Jesus.
How many sinners in the house?
Okay, so if you came here, you're like, oh, man, this is a place full of righteous people.
Hey, not so much.
Our identity as sinners, that's who we are.
Then Jesus met us and the gospel tells us that even though we were sinners, Christ died for us.
So we can't look down on anyone.
Christians don't have the possible to look down on anyone because some of the greatest Christians were some of the darkest and deepest sinners, but God rescued us.
So God has taken us from sinners, listen,
to saint.
Your primary identity is not a sinner.
It's a sinner saved by grace or a saint.
So if you're a saint and a house, raise your hand.
If you've been saved by Jesus, if you are a Christian, you are a saint, a son or daughter of God.
And so we live in this identity.
We are sinners who are saved by grace.
And now we're saints, we're sons and daughters.
And one of the questions we ask is, well, how can we be like our father?
Jesus is constantly asking us, you know, your father in heaven is kind.
Your father in heaven is just and merciful.
So be like your father in heaven.
It's a relationship, not a rule book, but every once in a while.
Well, Christians get lost.
Followers of God, they get lost.
And so that's when God sends prophets to speak, prophets to correct.
And prophets say a word that sounds harsh, but it's a word that's hard, but it's a word that heals.
And well, most Christians,
We sort of avoid the prophets, but the prophets make up about one fifth of your Bible.
Prophets like Isaiah and Jeremiah and Ezekiel and Daniel and prophets aren't just talking about the future, though they talk a lot about the future.
Prophets have a way of truth telling, of speaking into a moment.
You see, we're about to read a passage from the book of Isaiah.
And like most of the prophets, the people are complaining to God.
God, I don't like the way that you're running the world.
Have you ever thought that?
God, I don't like the way you're running the world.
Just be honest.
I don't like the way God runs the world some days.
Am I the only person out here saying, God, I don't like the way you run the world?
If I was God, I would do it a lot different, but I'm not God.
Thank God, I'm not God, right?
God, we don't like the way you're running the world.
And the prophets are the place where God talks back.
And if you wanna read any part of the Bible that really reveals God as a person, the prophets are the most revealing.
This person who is God, who desires a relationship with his people.
And he's gonna say to the people, hey, something is missing in your life, in your worship.
It's Isaiah chapter 58.
Isaiah is speaking for God, and here's what God says, verse two.
For day after day, they seek me out.
They seem eager to know my ways as if they were a nation that does what is right and is not forsaken the commands of its God.
They ask me for just decisions and they seem eager for God to come near them.
Now, why have we fasted, they say, and you have not seen it?
Why have we humbled ourselves and you have not noticed?
Yet on the day of your fasting, you do as you please and exploit all the workers.
and your fasting ends in quarreling and strife, and in striking each other with wicked fists, you cannot fast as you do today and expect your voice to be heard on high.
Is this the kind of fast I've chosen, only a day for people to humble themselves?
Is it only for bowing one's head like a reed or a line in sackcloth and ashes?
Is that what you call a fast, a day acceptable to the Lord?
What's happening here?
God is responding back to the people who are saying, God, why aren't you answering our prayer?
Why aren't you with us?
Why aren't you for us?
And God's like, well, I got a question for you.
You seem so eager to follow me.
You gather together and you worship and you're fasting, but I can see past that facade because as you worship in fast, this hour a week, you come to worship, you sing your songs, you read my word,
with hold food from your body to show honor.
If you want to be honest, God says, I can see through that ritual, it's very empty.
Because as you pray and worship for your hour a week and you fast, you're exploiting your employees and you're fighting and quarreling with your brothers.
And God's like, you don't think I see through those empty rituals?
How many of you that God cannot be tricked or fooled?
God sees and knows all things.
And so he's saying in a very,
incisive way, a very direct way.
I can see past this facade.
And so then he shares what he's looking for in his people, verse six.
He's not this the kind of fasting I have chosen to lose the chains of injustice and untie the cords of the yoke and set the oppressed free and break every yoke.
Is it not to share your food with the hungry and to provide the poor wanderer with shelter?
And will you see the naked to clothe them and not to turn away from your own flesh
and blood.
God says, if you want to worship in a way that's authentic and genuine, it's not just an hour a week.
It's not just a song that you sing.
No, it's the way you treat other people, especially people who are vulnerable.
It could be someone who works for you, it's someone who's maybe a fatherless child or a single parent or someone who doesn't have the same advantage as a privilege as a view that we should turn our eyes toward them.
And that's what worship looks like.
And God's trying to reorient the people through the voice of the prophet Isaiah to say this simple idea.
Vertical worship requires horizontal compassion.
In other words, if the vertical doesn't line up with the horizontal, then something is missing.
And so we want to be thoughtful as the people of God.
Wait, when I come to church and I sing those songs, I sing them with my heart.
I mean them and I open my Bible and I pray, but when I leave here,
What happens to my life Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday?
Because if it's only an hour a week and it doesn't affect my personal life, then my worship words and songs are empty.
In fact, God will go further through the prophet Amos to say something that when you first hear it, you're like, wow, God sounds angry.
Amos is a fig farmer.
He's a poor shepherd.
And God gives him a word about the songs of worship and the gathering of God's people.
And this is what he says through the prophet Isaiah, or prophet Amos, Amos chapter five.
I hate, I despise your religious festivals.
Your assemblies are a stench to me.
Even though you bring me burnt offerings and grain offerings, I will not accept them.
Though you bring choice fellowship offerings, I will have no regard for them.
away with the noise of your songs.
I will not listen to the music of your harps, but let justice roll on like a river and righteousness like a never failing stream."
Did you just read what I just read?
God says, stop singing.
Stop your joyful songs.
Stop all your instruments because that vertical worship you're giving me.
isn't translated at all in your everyday life.
And if you want those songs to reach heaven and if you want my presence to inhabit you and you want to live the blessed life that I offer you, then those two things have to match.
So stop your singing and go out and show justice and mercy.
Let it roll like a river.
Now what does it mean for justice and righteousness and mercy to roll like a river?
It means that it spills out from God's people.
and it flows into our communities, into our neighborhoods, all over, saturating people with the love and the justice and the righteousness of God.
And the prophets were so curious, how is God gonna do that?
Well, God's gonna do that through the coming of Messiah because the prophets didn't just look at the condition of God's people and say, they're lost, they're stumbling, they're broken, they can't find their way.
So God doesn't say, well, it stinks to be you.
Now this is when he sends his son, Jesus.
And when Jesus comes into the world, he uses the very words of the prophet to introduce his mission.
As Jesus goes into the synagogue to talk about why he has come and what his mission is, he uses Isaiah's own words.
If you just turn just one page to Isaiah 61, Jesus first introduction to his hometown in the synagogue is this passage.
Here's what Jesus says.
about the coming of Messiah.
Isaiah 61, verse one, the spirit of the sovereign Lord is on me, because the Lord has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor.
He has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim freedom for the captives, and the release from darkness for the prisoners, and to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor and the day of the vengeance of our God.
Jesus says this in this synagogue, he takes the scroll,
He rolls it up and he sits down, and he says to all the people who are listening, who are very familiar with his passage.
He says, today this scripture is fulfilled in your hearing.
And everyone was like, whoa, he's saying, he's the Messiah.
And what is the Messiah going to do?
Not just worship God and teach people to worship God, but let
Justice roll like a river, let righteousness flow like a never-ending stream.
He's going to bind the broken heart if we're claiming freedom for the captives and a release from darkness for the prisoner.
And so Jesus introduces this idea.
He embodies the beautiful righteousness and justice of God.
And he has some difficult conversations.
Often we think of nice Jesus, kind Jesus, gentle Jesus, and he was all those things.
But Jesus had a particular tone for a particular group of people.
And sometimes we get this wrong.
You see, a lot of times you'll hear in church today, those sinful people, those sexually immoral people, those greedy, unrighteous people, we should get mad at them.
But it's interesting that for the most sinful people in Jesus' life, he was gentle and kind and inviting.
He called them to repentance, but Jesus got angry
at the people who sang the loudest, who knew the Scriptures the best, and you wore a mask of superiority that they were better somehow than other people.
He threw over tables in the temple and he dedicated an entire chapter, an entire sermon, Matthew chapter 23, toward that type of spiritual superiority.
I'm better than you and you and those people because I know all the words to the song, I know how to pray, I know how to fast, I give.
And Jesus says this in Matthew 23 to people like that.
It sounds a lot like the prophet Amos and the prophet Isaiah.
Matthew 23, 23, woe to you.
Teachers of the law and Pharisees, you hypocrites.
You give a tenth of your spices, a mint, and dill, and cumin.
But you have neglected the more important matters of the law, justice, mercy, and faithfulness.
You should have practiced the latter without neglecting the former.
And he goes on to say, you swallow, you strain out a mat, and you swallow a camel.
And you'll go across the earth to make people twice the son of hell that you are.
I mean, Jesus did not hold back to people who felt superior because of the way they sang or fasted or gave or prayed.
And he's like, guys, guys, guys, guys, guys, you're doing all the right, you found all the rules, but you're missing the point.
You're not exercising justice.
You're not showing mercy.
There's no kindness or faithfulness in you.
You can't have it this way and that way.
The vertical and the horizontal,
to match.
And so we look at the early church, the people who follow Jesus, and we see them following this pattern.
James, the brother of Jesus, would write to the early church.
He would say, you know, you want to live a life of pure religion?
Do what?
Care for the widow and the orphan in their distress and keep herself unspotted from the world.
You want to look at the early church's record of not just preaching the gospel and singing songs of worship and holding prayer.
He's been going into the street collecting for widows who are hungry,
Helping people affected by famine, caring for the sick and the poor and the needy.
This is the entire book of Acts.
It's not just the preaching of the gospel.
It's the demonstration of the gospel.
And we see this over and over.
And so just a simple point.
Loving the vulnerable is our spiritual heritage.
And I want to take a moment.
I want to think about the spiritual heritage we've been given that for generations, Christians haven't just
sang songs of worship and prayed prayers and taught God's word.
But they've demonstrated what justice and mercy look like in a community.
And there's a blessing for this.
We go back to Isaiah 58 and look what God says to the people who live in this way, what God's desire is for his people.
If we will lose the chains of injustice and set the oppressed free and share our food, what will happen?
Verse eight.
Then your light will break forth like the dawn.
and your healing will quickly appear, and your righteousness will go before you, and the glory of the Lord will be your rear guard.
Then you will call, and the Lord will answer.
You'll cry for help, and he will say, here I am.
And if you do away with the yoke of oppression, with the pointing finger, and the malicious talk, and if you spend yourselves in behalf of the hungry, and satisfy the needs of the oppressed, then your light will rise, and the darkness, and your night will become like the noonday.
And the Lord will guide you always.
And he will satisfy your needs in his son's scorched land and will strengthen your frame.
And you will be like a well-watered garden, like a spring whose waters never fail.
And your people will rebuild the ancient ruins and raise up the age-old foundations.
You will be called the repair of broken walls, the restorer of streets with dwellings.
What is God saying to his people?
The vertical and the horizontal the half to match, the commandment, the greatest commandment to love God with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength and to love your neighbor as yourself.
You can't disconnect those two things.
And if you, my people, live in this way, your light will shine in the darkness like the noon day sun.
You'll be satisfied in the quiet place with the well of God's provision and grace and generosity.
And you will develop a reputation as a certain group of people
who are the restorer of things that are broken.
Imagine the people of God known for taking broken things and laboring in the mess in the brokenness to repair them and the people go, wow, you know, wherever Christians go, things that are broken become whole, people that are sick become healed, people that are lost are found, people in darkness become light.
This is our spiritual heritage.
and we want to be the people who take this heritage and run with it for the next generation.
Is anybody with me today?
This is Isaiah speaking for God, giving this vision for what God's people are called to do.
Let's talk about our spiritual history.
Listen, the church has always been at its best when we've been living this out and we've always been at our worst when we haven't.
And so I wanna go through history.
We're just gonna go through a little history lesson and just see how we've gotten to today and maybe some of the ways that Christians have lived out this type of life.
And many of these quotations, many of these ideas came from religious opponents of Christianity, people who tried to stop Christianity from growing.
So after we get through the book of Acts, well, what happened?
Well, history tells us.
Well, in 112 AD, there was a man named Cleany the Younger and he interrogated Christians.
because he wanted to suppress what he called this contagious superstition that is Christianity.
And he was shocked at how Christians supported other Christians, how there was this network of support that they would always help and serve each other.
And during the two major plagues of the first and second century in Rome, as people were dying of the plagues, Christians stayed in the cities while people fled for their lives.
And they cared for the poor.
and they cared for the sick.
Christians actually moved into places of danger to care for people, and because of this, now all of a sudden, not because they're trying to seize political power, but they became the mayors and the leaders, and what became a persecuted group of Christians eventually became the official religion of the Roman Empire, not through conquest, not through power, but through humble service, providing justice, letting it roll like a river,
and Dionysus of Alexander in 260 AD described the heart of Christians who had walked toward danger, and even were willing to sacrifice their lives to serve people who were sick.
He wrote, most of our brothers showed unbounded love and loyalty, never sparing themselves, tending to the sick, ministering to them in Christ, and with them departed this life, serenely happy.
It's as if they believe the words of Jesus.
that when he said in Matthew 25, whatever you did for the least of these, my brothers, you did to me.
When I was hungry, you fed me.
When I was in prison, you visited me.
When I was naked, you clothed me.
And whatever you do to the least of these you did to me, these Christians, they believe that so deeply.
They were willing to lay down their lives to care for sick people.
They didn't even know.
And the opponents of Christianity, this is a contagious, superstitious thing.
We got to figure out how to stop it, but they couldn't stop it.
And so one of the other ways that Christians distinguish themselves and let justice and righteousness flow like a river and never any stream was their treatment of unwanted children.
So there was a practice in the Roman Empire in the first and the second and the third century.
It was called exposure.
If you had a child that you did not want, and typically this child was a female because male boys, they were, they were wanted, they were more valuable or children with disabilities,
Well, there was a very common practice of taking this baby and laying it on a wall of exposure and letting the elements or the animals do their work.
And these babies would die, just abandoned.
But Christians were like, yeah, that can't happen.
And listen, listen, this was a completely accepted practice.
It sounds so barbaric, but at the height of Greek and Roman ethics, we think of Socrates and Plato and Aristotle, like this idea of Greek virtue is so high, but listen to Aristotle.
Let there be a law that no deformed child should be reared.
If you have a defect of any kind, you're a burden on society you don't deserve to live.
And Christians were like, oh no, because they deeply believed in this idea of the amago day that every child born unborn
You're young, you're old, you're sick, you're healthy.
You're the model of perfection or you're ailing.
Whatever condition you are, every single human being is made in the very image and likeness of God and is worthy of dignity and protection, right?
That's a Christian idea.
And so there was a man in the Calistus and he organized what we're called these
Life watches, that people would, Christians would go hang out at these walls of exposure where babies were left for infanticide and they would take these kids.
And they would raise them as they were their own sons and daughters.
And the idea of adoption that took place in the Roman Empire was fueled by Christians who were caring for abandoned babies.
And this, this is our heritage.
This is our legacy.
This led to the foundation of orphanages all across
This region in the second, in the third century, the idea of an orphanage where an abandoned child could be cared for in love is a Christian idea.
It didn't matter what race you were, what language you spoke.
It didn't matter where you came from.
It didn't matter what model of beauty perfection you were.
You were cared for because Christians believed in the dignity of every human being.
And there was a man named Basel.
He was the Christian Bisser ancestry in the fourth century.
And he came up with this idea that we need to create a care center for people, not just for orphans, but for the elderly, a place of hospice, a place of care.
We need to create a hospital because back in the day, if you were sick, you couldn't afford a doctor.
Only rich people had doctors back in the day is like, what if we provided doctors to care for anyone who walked in at no cost to themselves because we're Christians and we care.
He built this massive, massive facility that cared for, again, those who were orphans.
And those who were sick.
I mean, think about the word hospital.
Hospital comes from the word hospitality, the Greek word, the love, fileo of strangers.
The first hospital, the first public hospital in world history was started by Christians to say,
No matter who is sick, no matter who is dying, no matter who has a family or not, we're gonna care for them in Jesus' name because he commanded us to live in this way.
And not just children, but even in death.
Christians were the first people that had this idea that if you died, you needed
a dignified burial, whether you were slave or free or rich or poor.
If you go to Rome today, you see these things called catacombs.
My wife and I have been through many of these catacombs.
These catacombs were burial places and Christians were the first people that didn't matter what class you were or what family were from.
You have slaves.
that are buried next to noble people in all these different catacombs.
And it was the Christian way to say, if you're made in the image of God, even in death, you deserve dignity.
And we're gonna take care of you and bury you in honor because this is what God did for us.
This is a Christian idea, right?
Let justice roll like a river and a righteousness like a never ending stream.
And again, the religious opponents of Christianity,
did not like this because it took away their power and their influence over people.
There's a man named Julian, the apostate.
He was hostile to Christians in Christianity.
And he complained to all of his people in letters that we have today.
And here's one of the lines of one of the letters.
He says, the impious Galileans, those are the Christians.
They not only take care of their own poor, but ours as well.
And everyone can see that our people lack aid from us.
I love this.
He's like, we're bad leaders.
We know it.
We don't care about people, but they're making us look bad because now they take care of their people.
They're taking care of our people.
And if this keeps up, we're going to lose our power.
And so he's writing to all these people.
Let's imitate the Christians.
We need to consolidate our power because we're losing to all these people.
They're caring for people that aren't even their own with love and justice and compassion and mercy.
And you can see the frustration in this letter.
And this, again,
is the heritage that Christians have now.
Now, most of these stories and most of this part of history, maybe you're not familiar with.
I'm gonna fast forward a thousand years.
And there's a lot that happened over those thousand years, but I'm gonna take you to the 1800s to a man and his wife, William and Catherine Booth.
They formed an organization called the Salvation Army.
Anybody ever heard of the Salvation Army, right?
And here was the idea.
We're gonna go out of our church walls and we're gonna have a revival meeting right in front
of the bar.
Yeah.
And we're going to play worship songs and we're going to invite drunk people who are bound by alcoholism.
And we're going to invite them into a relationship with Jesus and then we're going to put them in homes and halfway houses and care for them and love them.
And not only that, we're going to help with orphanages and we're going to help lobby and advocate for women and children who are vulnerable.
See, this is the start of the industrial revolution in England.
And well, there were no laws to protect children that worked in factories.
In fact, half of the people that worked in factories in England at this time were children, working 12 to 16 hour days in very dangerous situations.
It was not uncommon for children to be killed or maimed in their everyday work because they were smaller.
They could work in these small shafts in the coal mines and they could reach behind equipment that was already running.
If they lost a hand or they lost their life, let's get another kid.
And if you were an orphan and had to a family,
There was no one to advocate for you and William Booth and Catherine Booth said, there's no way.
This is right that people who call themselves Christians are maximizing profit in their business and not caring for these women and children who have no rights.
And so they lobbied not just to work for the abolition of slavery, but for women's rights and children's rights because they believed in this crazy idea that every man, woman and child is made in the very image and likeness of God.
worth fighting for, worth defending, because God did that for us.
This is our spiritual heritage.
So it's not just William and Catherine Booth.
Let you go across to America, and there's a man named Charles Lorraine Brace.
And he started something called the orphan train.
You see, in the East, in New York, in Boston, in Philadelphia, there were tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of abandoned children.
They're all in the streets.
being used in child prostitution, being used in child labor.
And he said, this is wrong.
We need you to something.
He organized this train that would go across America.
And at every stop, families could take in children and adopt them.
And this idea was so innovative at the time, it helped save thousands of lives and gives 200,000 children found families because of a man who said, I'm not just going to sing my song in my church.
I'm gonna fight for justice and a righteous in my city, in my nation, because this is what God did for me, and I have a chance to do it for someone else, right?
You see, the church has always been at her best when she has advocated for the poor and for the vulnerable.
Where the songs that we have sung in church and the stories we have read about who God is are reflected
in our everyday life, but you know, there's a dark side to Christian history.
If we're just being honest, it's not all good.
You see, when Christians gravitate toward power at any cost, influence a chance to make money, to accumulate cultural power, well, we see things like the crusades,
The inquisitions, the opposition of civil rights and abolition.
And every once in a while in Christian history, God raises up another prophet like an Amos, like an Isaiah, not to tell the future, but to talk in a very scathing critique about how Christians have disconnected their worship from their life.
And one of those men in American history was a man named Frederick
Douglas.
He was born as a slave.
As a young man, he became a Christian.
He began to read the Bible and pour over its pages.
He had experienced things that were so hard for his brain to connect with Christianity.
I grew up in this place where I would watch a pastor pray before he whipped his slave.
I watched a pastor preach a sermon about
the sanctity of marriage and family, and then auction off a family and separate them that afternoon.
I watched him talk about sexual purity, and I watched all this sexual immorality with people who were seeing this property, not even as human.
There was this disconnect between the songs they were singing, and the Bible they were reading, and the way they were living.
He wrote in this
a very direct prophetic way, and this is one of those things that he wrote.
Between the Christianity of this land and the Christianity of Christ, I recognize the widest possible difference.
So why that to receive the one as good and pure and holy is of necessity to reject the other as bad, corrupt, and wicked?
To be the friend of the one is of necessity to be the enemy of the other.
I love the pure, peaceful, and impartial Christianity of Christ,
But I therefore hate the corrupt slave-holding, women whipping, cradle plundering, partial and hypocritical Christianity of this land.
And it was men like Frederick Douglass and people who learned to use their voice that pointed out some of the hypocrisy of people who would sing their songs and read their Bible and have a complete disconnection from how they treated other people.
The church is always at her best.
We in our vertical worship.
translates to our horizontal compassion for people.
When we see the image of God in anyone born or unborn, young or old, sick or healthy, this is the call of every Christian to love people in Jesus' name.
Anybody with me?
This is our heritage.
And there are always those moments of history where you like scratch your head.
Like there are many narratives of German Christians who would hear the rail cars go by their church filled with
Jewish men, women, and children on their way to concentration camps and the sound of their cries were so hard to hear.
They just sang louder.
I'm just going to sing louder.
I don't want to hear what's happening outside of here.
I just want to focus on heaven.
And God says, I hate that.
And you know, it's so easy for us to look back on Christian history and go, thank God.
I wasn't in the German church.
Thank God.
Because I would have done it differently.
Would you have?
See, C.S.
Lewis.
He says, every generation has what you call cultural snobbery, which is a great way to say it's so easy for us to look back on all these generations.
God, I can't believe they did that.
I can't believe they believe that.
I can't believe they preached that or wrote that or said that.
What was wrong with those people?
And C.S.
Lewis says, you know, they're going to write about you.
Like if Jesus doesn't come back two or three generations from now, what will
Christians say about this Christian group here in the 2020s.
Now, if we don't think they will, that's cultural snobbery.
The question is, what will they say?
What is our blind spot?
If we're called to love like Jesus, then where are there gaps in our compassion, the way that we live?
And this is important to think about
This isn't just a history lesson.
The Bible is like a mirror for us to look and see ourselves.
And so maybe, maybe it's that we are the most affluent generation that has ever existed on planet Earth in the history of the world.
And somehow, with all of that resource, we still keep it to ourselves because somehow we don't feel wealthy.
Maybe it's because we live in a current culture that dehumanizes other people that were able to look at people, those people.
And you fill in the blank, we talked about it last week, those people, those people I should fear, those people I should hate.
And there's plenty of partisan hacks who are gonna tell us that, that are gonna demand our allegiance, but our allegiance is not to them.
Our allegiance is to God's word.
It's the way the church has always been at her best.
Don't give in to lesser allegiances.
Don't give in to the hate and the fear-mongering that allows people to accumulate money or power or control.
That's when the church gets lost.
Maybe it's not
that we're the wealthiest generation and we're not sharing.
Maybe it's not that we've dehumanized entire groups of people.
Maybe it's that we have compassion fatigue, that there's so many problems and needs as a hurricane here and a famine there and injustice here and a war and like there's so much stuff and we're just like, I mean, I can't even do a shoebox to be honest because I'm just overwhelmed.
I'm exhausted.
And we don't do anything at all because we're so with everything.
Now, I don't know what it's gonna be, but I pray that God would use his word like a mirror to show us ourselves so that we could live in a way that loves like Jesus.
Now, if you think that we're the only ones that have had this problem, no, I mean, Jonathan Edwards, he taught a sermon in 1733.
And here's the title of the sermon that Jonathan Edwards preached.
It was called The Duty of Charity for the Poor.
And he talked about in 1733, the three reasons why Christians don't help people.
Here's the first reason.
He says Christians don't help people.
They're in need, but they're not desperate.
So we might say, well, they have no food, but they have a cell phone, so they should figure it out.
They're not desperate, desperate.
They're not starving to death.
And so because they're not starving to death, I want to help someone who's like right there on death door.
I'll help them.
But those people don't seem so desperate, so I'm not gonna help them.
1733.
Second thing you said, why Christians don't help their neighbors or friends, I don't have much to spare.
They're not desperate and I don't have a lot either.
And what Jonathan ever said, what you really meant to say is I can't help you without it costing me something.
And so because it cost me something, yeah, you're not desperate.
I'm not really ready to help you where it hurts me.
And then the third one, remember, this is 1733.
The third one is this.
They brought this on themselves.
Yeah, that's why I'm not going to help them.
And those people, they did this to themselves.
That's why they don't have any money.
That's why they're in this desperate space of, I mean, I'm not going to help someone like that because they did this to themselves.
1733, sound very familiar.
Yeah, this is the human condition.
It has nothing to do with our cultural moment.
It has to do with our own defense mechanism.
See, here's the deal.
You know who I wanna help?
I wanna help someone who's in a circumstance that's no fault of their own.
They haven't done anything wrong.
And that when I help them, they experience this deep sense of gratitude.
Like, thank you so much, Doug, for what you've done for me.
And I'm gonna take what you've done for me and I'm gonna help other people and they give me a hug.
God bless you, you're like Jesus.
You know something about those people?
They don't exist.
All right, let's just be honest.
The people who've never done anything wrong that are helpless victims to all these circumstances and are gonna say thank you and take what you've given them and make the most of it, I don't know if I've ever met a person like that in my whole life.
And isn't that the point?
When did Jesus help you?
You see, I wanna say this, guilt is not gonna motivate us to help people.
This is not a sermon about guilt.
as guilt doesn't work.
Only thing that helps awaken a Christian whose heart is not burning with compassion for people around him or her is grace.
A heart awakened to the gospel for what Jesus did for you.
Love to people.
Love people.
In every Christian that has an experience or
shared compassion with others that part of their heart is asleep and needs to be awakened.
And there's a direct relationship between how much a person understands how much grace they have received and experienced from God to how they will show it to other people.
And this is an act of grace to realize I didn't deserve it and Jesus came from me and it cost him way more than it cost me to help this person.
And there were so many times I never told Jesus, thank you.
And he didn't stop blessing me.
He didn't stop healing me, didn't stop redeeming my life.
And so wow, when I think about what he did for me, I want to do this for other people.
I mean, Jesus talked about this, right?
He said things like, Jesus said crazy stuff.
Like don't just love your friends, but love your enemies.
And you know why you should love them?
Because you should be like my father who is kind to the wicked and the ungrateful.
Wait, why should you be kind to wicked people?
in ungrateful people, because God is.
And he's your father.
And you've gone from sinner to saint, from enemy of God to child of God, and he says, so be like your father.
This is not a book of rules.
Do a shoebox and help a kid or else.
No.
Fill up a grocery bag and deliver it, or you're a bad Christian.
No, no, no, this is not a book of rules.
This is just an awakening of a heart to say for all that he has done for you.
What could you begin to do for someone else, right?
And it doesn't happen in the day and it doesn't happen because of one sermon and I just want to encourage you.
And it doesn't happen by you leaving here and doing a thousand things.
Maybe you just begin to think, God, what area of injustice in our world grieves my heart?
What area do I see the need for compassion?
I think about it all the time.
I just haven't done anything yet.
And as you meditate, like how do I advocate for unborn children?
so that they could be born and thrive and have good families.
How do I help a single mom who's desperate?
How do I help a child in foster care?
How do I deliver a food or help a woman like Misty who has no visitors?
How do I serve children with disabilities?
And we have ministries like Kings kids and four kids and Hope and Eva and for people living in their cars all across South Florida, they're hundreds of them.
They're all around us.
And if we just open our eyes and we let our vertical worship be matched by our horizontal compassion,
Well, everything Isaiah said about this blessing flowing in and through his people would be true of us.
And I dream of a day, I pray for a day where every single Christian who calls Calvary Chapel at our home doesn't just know the songs and sing them and doesn't just know God's word deeply, but practices outside the four walls of this church and the way they love their neighbors and their friends and their strangers, even the way they love their enemies.
That is our spiritual heritage.
And so I wanna
tell you one final story.
It's a story of how God found us.
You see, prophets have a way to tell us the truth, not just to talk about the future.
And Ezekiel is a prophet who tells a story about an abandoned baby kicking on the side of the road.
And his baby is described as a baby whose umbilical cord was never cut because no one cared about this baby.
Was never washed off, still covered with blood.
No water washed over the baby, no ointment on the baby, just thrown off in a field to the side of the road.
And God said, I walked down that road and I heard that baby's cry.
And I picked that baby up and I washed that baby off.
And I brought that baby into the royal family.
And that child grew up
and wore the finest clothes and the finest perfume and the greatest jewelry aid at the king's table.
And then Ezekiel says, that man who walked down the road was God himself, and that child was you.
You couldn't help yourself.
You couldn't save yourself.
All you could do was cry.
And you know one of the most powerful cries in the entire Bible is just this cry, God, help.
One of those powerful prayers you could ever pray, help, have mercy on me.
I'm a sinner, I'm desperate.
And the beautiful thing about the gospel is that no matter who you are or where you've come from, whether you grip us an atheist or a Hindu or a Muslim
Or you group in a religious tradition, but it was all just a book of rules for you.
And you've never just cried to God to save you, to forgive you, to come into relationship with Him.
Well, that every day of your life, He's waited for this moment where you actually cry out to Him and He comes for you.
And He forgives you and He adopts you.
And if you read the end of the story, even that child that was adopted by God rebelled against God and did their own thing,
And even after all of that, God says at the end of that story.
And even so, after I did all this stuff for you and you did this to me, I will still atone for your sins.
And I'll take you back.
This is the good news of the gospel.
If you are breathing, there is still hope.
If you are mine and your ears can hear this message.
God's love for you is waiting for you to come home for the first time or come back from a long time.
He's like, I want to atone for you.
That's why I sent my son Jesus to die in your place to pay for your sin dead.
Every stupid thing you've ever said or done, I already saw that's why I sent Jesus.
You could not save yourself.
You could only receive my love and forgiveness.
And if you have never received the love and forgiveness of God in a way where you say, I know I'm a sinner.
I can't save myself.
So have mercy on me.
And today if you're willing to say, just, I know you died for me and I receive your forgiveness and I repent of my sins.
And I'm gonna believe the good news of the gospel.
I'm gonna give my life to you that today you can make a decision like that.
God's not gonna make you make that decision.
He's only gonna offer this extravagant love to say, today you can be saved, forgiven, healed, adopted.
And this is why we create this last moment.
We're gonna play a song.
If you know this is you, I'm gonna ask you to stand up, step into the aisle and walk this way.
I'm gonna pray a very simple prayer with you.
A prayer of confession.
A prayer that will be the most powerful thing you will ever say out of your entire mouth, your entire life as your sins are forgiven and your identity changes.
Your name is written in the book of life and heaven.
This is that moment.
It requires a response.
And so if that's you, as this song begins, stand up and walk this way.
And we will celebrate with all of heaven as you come.
If that's you, come now.
so honored to be a part of this moment in your life, where you pray a prayer of repentance, where God brings you into his family.
And this moment is not about the perfect words that you say.
It's about a heart and a mind that's ready to receive the love of God and the forgiveness of God.
Come on.
I'm so glad that you're here today.
Welcome to the family.
And so I'm gonna give you some simple words to say to God.
And he will hear this prayer and he will answer this prayer because God keeps his promises.
So say this to God.
Lord God, I open my heart and I invite you inside.
Forgive my sin.
Today I repent.
Now, fill me with your spirit, and I will walk with you all the days of my life.
I pray this in Jesus' name.
Amen.
are so honored to be part of this moment with you.
And I want to ask you just to give us five more minutes.
You just made the most important decision of your life.
I'm going to ask you to follow me and the crew here over to the open door where we're going to give you a Bible.
When you personally will be back with your friends in a moment.
So guys, can we give them a hand as they go this way?
In church, let's...
Let's sing this final song as our declaration that Jesus has paid it all.
He's finished His completed work on the cross, has purchased our salvation, and let us sing this song with great gratitude as we approach our Thanksgiving week.
God bless you.
Let's sing.
Next week, have a great Sunday.
Thanks for listening to today's message.
You know, here at Calvary, we believe a relationship with Jesus changes everything.
And if you've decided to follow Jesus, we'd love for you to text the word believe to 31352 so you can find out what it means to follow Christ.
And to learn more about Calvary and all of our campuses, you're free to visit calvaryftl.org.